JUDY WOODRUFF: The United
Nations has called it the worst
humanitarian crisis since 1945,
and, just today, the lead
editorial in The Washington
Post called it the worst crisis
you have never heard of.
Drought and famine threaten 20
million people in the war-torn
countries of Yemen, South
Sudan, and Somalia, as
well as drought-stricken
neighbors, such as Ethiopia.
This week, for the first
time, eight of the leading
U.S.-based international
relief organizations
are launching the Global
Emergency Response Coalition.
It's a joint fund-raising appeal
to the American public due to
the hunger crisis, which will
use social media to
amplify its message.
Special correspondent
Fred de Sam Lazaro
reports from the breakaway
region of Somalia known
as Somaliland.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: A glimpse
from our airplane window showed
the stark moonscape of drought
stretching for miles on
end, where many regions
in East Africa are at
risk of famine for the
third time in 25 years.
More than 360,000 children
are malnourished in Somalia;
70,000 of them are in critical
condition, according to the
World Health Organization.
We traveled to Somaliland,
a region that declared
itself independent of
Somalia more than two
decades ago.
Its capital, Hargeisa, has seen
an influx of mostly nomadic
livestock herders fleeing
the drought and in some
cases fighting in the
vast surrounding region.
They now live in
temporary camps.
Thirty-old-Year-old Hamda
Abdilahi Dhamac is the
mother of five children.
She came here after all of
her livestock, some 30 goats
and 50 sheep, died from the
drought.
HAMDA ABDILAHI DHAMAC,
Somaliland (through
translator): I used
to be part of a family
of livestock herders.
But now I have been forced
to come to this camp, where I
don't have enough money to buy
food and water.
I am really suffering.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: She gets
some money from relatives, but
says it's just enough to buy
rice and perhaps
an onion or tomato.
She can't afford beans or meat.
Like Dhamac, a majority
of Somalis make their
living by grazing animals.
But the drought has wiped out
70 percent of all livestock.
Dhamac says she doesn't know how
she will survive in the future.
HAMDA ABDILAHI DHAMAC
(through translator): I
don't have any hope now.
I don't have a
plan for my future.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Humanitarian
organizations are distributing
emergency food to ease the
crisis in the short-term.
Jeremiah Kibanya coordinates
relief efforts for World Vision.
JEREMIAH KIBANYA, World
Vision: We are providing
food commodities to the
people who right now
not having anything to eat.
We will need money to help
people get more animals into
their family and begin their
livelihood.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: How
much do you need, and what
percentage are you getting?
JEREMIAH KIBANYA: World Vision
has requested for about $37
million be able to respond.
And, so far, we have
received $11 million.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Most of
that money, $10 million, has
come from the U.S. government.
The Seattle-based agency is
helping deliver medical care
for those most vulnerable to
drought: pregnant
women and children.
At this clinic in the
village of Gabiley, babies
are measured and weighed.
A simple test with an
armband determines their
level of nutrition.
Yellow means moderate
malnutrition.
Red means severe.
If there's malnourishment,
the mothers are given packets
of peanut paste, along with
guidance to administer it only
to the sickest children, says
clinic director Asha Abdi Ali.
It's very difficult for a
mother if she has other children
who are hungry to not share
it?
ASHA ABDI ALI, Clinic
Director: We tell them
for the same reason.
It's that these other
children are not in need.
It is only for this child.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: But
it's still difficult?
ASHA ABDI ALI: It's
still difficult.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Keeping
people healthy is now made even
more difficult, ironically,
by rain.
Some rains have arrived this
year, and that's been enough
to green up the landscape.
But the effects of the
drought are going to linger
for a much longer time.
In fact, more immediately,
the threat to public
health is even greater.
That's because there are
millions of livestock
carcasses strewn all
over the landscape, and
what the rains do is
wash contaminants into
sources of drinking water.
On a hillside just outside
Dilla, a village about
an hour's drive from
the capital, carcasses
have become an unmanageable
problem for Mayor
Ibrahim Abdi Haji.
IBRAHIM ABDI HAJI, Mayor of
Dilla (through translator):
It is a bigger problem than we
can handle alone.
We have asked the government for
help to burn those dead animals.
But we haven't
received help yet.
We're afraid the community
will get waterborne
diseases from the animals.
We are very scared.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Water
which has collected at a nearby
earthen dam, has been completely
contaminated by both dead
and diseased animals.
JEREMIAH KIBANYA: And if people
use that water because of
desperation, and they don't have
any other water to drink, that
poses another threat again to
outbreak of waterborne diseases
to the communities.
That can lead to outbreaks
of diseases like acute
water diarrhea or cholera.
MAN: I want to show you
the best way of making
your water clean and safe.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: As a
short-term solution, World
Vision has distributed
some 75,000 filters
and chlorine tablets, so
people can purify their water.
But World Vision's
Kibanya says the other
issues, food shortages,
limited medical services
and lack of jobs, are
tougher ones to tackle.
There's a tradition
in this region, where
droughts are localized,
that communities welcome
people temporarily displaced
by the dry conditions.
But one of Dilla's newcomers,
Roda Yusaf, a mother of seven,
isn't sure she can return
to her former livelihood
without animals.
She plans to stay in
Dilla indefinitely.
RODA YUSAF, Somaliland (through
translator): When you come from
another area, it's difficult
to get a job here.
But the community has
been very supportive.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: Six years
ago, Dilla was in a similar
position of hosting displaced
persons from a severe famine
which ended up killing
260,000 people in Somalia.
Mayor Haji hopes that
doesn't happen again.
It seems to be a tradition
here for sharing and helping
people who are in distress in
the tribe.
After some time, does
that become difficult?
IBRAHIM ABDI HAJI (through
translator): We are starting
to reach that point.
The last time we supported
displaced people who
had come here, everybody
ended up suffering.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: The repeated
cycles of drought over the
past 25 years is constantly
on the minds of aid workers
and political leaders.
Saad Ali Shire is
Somaliland's foreign minister.
SAAD ALI SHIRE, Somaliland
Foreign Minister: We need to
look into the future and build
resilience, so when the drought
comes next time -- and it
will come, because these are
now more severe and
more frequent, because
of the climate change.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: He
says much greater long-term
investment must be made
to improve the region's
viability.
SAAD ALI SHIRE: We need
to change the way we raise
livestock in this country.
We very much follow --
we raise livestock as we
raised it 200 years ago.
It's a nomadic way.
I think we need to settle
and grow food for livestock.
But we also need, I think, to
orient part of our population
towards fishing and other
activities, industry, services.
FRED DE SAM LAZARO: However,
that seems unlikely,
at least in the short
term, given that urgent
appeals to deal with the
immediate needs have fallen far
short of what the U.N. and aid
agencies have requested.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Fred de Sam Lazaro reporting
from Dilla, Somaliland.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Fred's
reporting is a partnership
with the Under-Told
Stories Project at the
University of St.
Thomas in Minnesota.